From https://archive.org/details/GalacticBloodshedFunAndDeathOnTheInternet
Uploaded there 2008 by Billy Barron. Probably written 1992.

Galactic Bloodshed: Fun and Death on the Internet
by Billy Barron, University of North Texas (billy@unt.edu) aka the Sea Kings
    aka the Slinkies aka Bovine Combustion

The first thing to say about Galactic Bloodshed (GB) is that it is not that
bloody (more on this later).  GB is a TCP/IP based, multiuser galactic
colonization and conquest game.  If you have played Empire, imagine Empire in
space.  Normally there are several games being run on the Internet and lots of
people having fun at any given time.

Implementation

GB uses a client-server architecture.  There is one major client known as GB II.
On the server side, there have been two major and many minor versions of the
server.  The original server, which is still being updated regularly, is
called GB and the major derivate is known as HAP (Heirarchical Astronomy
Project).  The future of HAP is in doubt right now due to a job change on the
part of the major developer.  The differences between HAP and GB are obvious
to the players, but are trivial at the level of detail I'm covering here.  All
code is written in C with the exception of a few supplemental programs that are
not a standard part of the GB distribution.  Unfortunately, the code tends to be rather buggy.
Most of the bugs are the minor annoying type of bugs instead of the total
disaster type though they exist also.  Additionally, some versions of the client are
incompatible with some versions of the server.  The server is well known for
memory leaks, and it is in God's (the person running the game) best interest to
restart the server every few days.  Many games have ended due to database
corruption instead of having an actual victor.

For running the server, it is very important to keep the game database smaller
than the size of free RAM on the server machine.  If the database is too big,
the server will thrash at times.  This not only slows the game down, but the
whole server machine.

Basic Rules

GB operates on an update (or turn) basis.  Each update is also broken into
movements.  When a player performs an action, it may occur immediately or wait
until the next movement or update.  An example of an immediate action is firing
a laser or loading cargo into a ship.  On movements, ships actually move.  On
an update, ships move, jump through hyperspace, populations increase or
decrease, pollution increases, technology level goes up, taxes are earned, and
maintenance is paid among other things.

Actions points (APs) play an important part in the game.  Each solar system and
the galactic level earn APs on every update for a player based on population
and number of ships.  Almost any action uses APs.  When you run out of APs in a
system, you are unable to do anything in that system.  APs can be reallocated
from the galactic (global) level to a particular system, but that is usually
reserved for important situations as global APs are a rare and precious
commodity.

At the beginning of the game, a player selects the type of race and home planet
he would like.  There are two major types of races: mesomorphs (metamorphs) and
techies.  Techies are normal humaniod races.  Mesos can absorp people, have a
lower intelligence (at least to start with), have group consciousness, and have
space pods.  A space pod flies to a remote solar system and explodes sending
spores which land on planets and absorp population.  In the earlier days of GB,
mesos had an enormous advantage and almost always won games.  Then point based
race creation came along which equalized things.  Home worlds range from
asteriods to gas giants though the players on tiny planets tend to not do well.

In the early phases of the game, it is important to build large populations on
as many planets as possible.  This involves investing in
technology, exploration, and developing planets.  A common mistake by many
techie races at this stage of the game is to wait until they have hyperdrive to
explore other systems.  Properly built sublight ships will arrive in other
systems long before the player has hyperdrive.  I have noticed two trends regarding
starting location.  The first is
that the races that do not have nearby neighbors do extremely well unless they
are poorly played.  The other is that races that start on the edge of the
galaxy either do extremely well or get stomped quickly.  The reason is that the
race either gets surrounded early on and dies off, or survives and then in the
later stages of the game has less fronts to fight on.  For example, in the
fall 92 UNM game, all of the major races started on the edge of the galaxy.

The game from there goes in the next stage where players begin meeting each
other and either fighting or forming alliances.  As the games progresses, some
races die off and a few players or
alliances usually start dominating the game.  Ships, also, get more and more
powerful.

Another method of playing is known as the blitz.  In a blitz game, updates
happen every few minutes and the game lasts one night or weekend.  I'm going to
ignore blitzes for this article and concentrate on regular games, but most of
the material here applies to blitzes as well as regular games.

Winners & Losers

Several factors distinguish the winners from the losers.  Luck of the draw
(starting location and the random number generator) does play a big part in
the game.  However, even so certain players almost always do well and others
always do poorly.

Good players always try to be on immediately following an update.  On an
update, ships jump through hyperspace, pods explode, and populations increase.
When ships jump through hyperspace, they will often immediately be involved in
a space battle.  Your ships will automatically defend themselves if you are not
on.  However, manually handling your ships' firing works much better than the
primitive automatic algorithm.  When pods explode or populations increase,
ground combat may occur.  It is advantegous to be the attacker in almost all
cases because you can try to capture enemy ships instead of vice versa.

Good players spend more time playing.  Almost always the races that get more
attention do better.  Especially the area of planetary development suffers with
limited attention.  However, GB can be addicting and dangerous to the rest of
your life.  Working full-time and being a top GB player is doable.  Working
full-time, having a girlfriend, and being a top GB player would be tough (I
couldn't do it).

Good players learn timesaving measures to offset playing too much to a degree.
Using client macros is a must for such things as building ships and launching
pods.  The other reason I used macros was, on occasion, I would plan battles
out before the update and write a macro.  After the update, I would immediately
execute the macro which would make attacks faster than the enemy could respond.
The opttech package is a must for calculating investments.  There are some
crypt breaking and automated people moving code in existance, but may not be
publically available.  Automatic playing programs, known as cyborgs, also exist
but have been banned from many GB games.

Good players report bugs to God and gets God's opinion on whether or not they
should be used.  Many player try to keep bugs secret, but usually someone else
figures out what is going on and reports it.  The player, who was using the
bug to their advantage, usually ends up get
penalized and incurs the wrath of the other players in the game.  Also, allies
sometimes desert these people.

Good players do not use the default ship configurations in general.  To begin with, some
of the defaults are not well balanced and some of the ship types are useless in
my opinion. I went one game without building a single explorer or destroyer and
used interesting low-tech cargo ships and tanker configurations.  Also,
specialized ships are very useful.  The high armor shuttle for landing on those
highly defended planets is a good one.  A real game example of this was the time an
enemy used up most of his defensive capability on attacking my highly armored
cargo ships.  Then my and my ally's weakly armored, but heavily armed, fleet of
battleships, missiles, space mines, and Orbital Assault Platforms (OAPs) came
in and easily took over the system.

Good players come up with surprises.  One strategy, which is now well known,
but was a shocker in its early use was the "no destruct" missile.  In this
strategy, you build two types of missiles.  The first ones are the usual
configuration.  The second type are cheap missiles that have no explosion
capability (the "no destruct" missiles).  In battle, you launch the "no
destruct" missiles first.  The enemy usually flees or expends a lot of
firepower on these harmless missiles leaving them vunerable to your real
attack.

Good players do not give out too much information about their race.  If the
enemy knows where your home world is and all your factories are, then you are
not in as good a defensive position.

Good players know how to play GB politics.  This is the real meat of the game.
One of the most famous races of all times was Erk in the summer 91 Berkeley
game.  The ultrapowerful Erk had made enemies out of basically every other race in
the game with one exception.  By the end of the game, Erk was no longer the top
ranked player due to overwhelming odds.  The counterexample was Bovine
Combustion in the summer 91 UNM game.  The Bovines were another runaway leader
(partly due to incredible racial statistics) though not as much as Erk, but the
Bovines found some relatively strong allies including the third ranked player
and held on to the top ranking.

The formation of alliances is an important step.  A good alliance consists of
races that all have a useful characteristic that is missing from the other
races.  This could be raw materials (resources), fuel, ground fighting ability,
high technology level, manpower, or strategic location.

However, alliances are not always what they appear.  An example was the fall 91
UNM where the Slinkies (me), the Phreddies, and the Rats plus a couple of other
minor races were involved in a secret alliance from very early on in the
game.  We had planned out in detail how to confuse, divide, and conquer the
universe.  The Phreddies attacked many of their allies disabling them and
leaving them open to attack from the Rats.  I publically called the Phreddies
scum and declared neutrality with them (we had been allies up until then).
This allowed me to maintain good relations with the enemies of the Rats and
Phreddies and gather intelligence on their plans.  There is an interesting
story on how the secret alliance had discussions during the game without the
other races being able to tell that, but I am keeping this trick to myself for
future games.  :-)  A little later on, the Phreddies blew up one of my ships,
which happened to be out of fuel and useless anyway, to firmly plant the idea
that we were not getting along in the minds of other races.  However, at the same
time, the Phreddies were secretly building ships for me.  The point of this
game description was to show the lengths that people will go to win.  This
particular alliance was rather effective though there were some near disasters
like when my close public ally, the Sons of ET, tried to start a war against
the Rats.  In another game I was in, a triple agent existed at one point.

Internet Implications

GB does have an impact on the Internet traffic load.  Games are on different
port numbers so there is no way to calculate the its overall impact on the
network.  It is safe to say that a GB session is roughly equivalent to a
high-use telnet session.  It's also safe to say that the majority of the
traffic is on the NSFNET backbone and not CIX in the US.  Over 90% of the
traffic during a GB session (byte wise) is from the server to the client.  It
should be noted that players with faster Internet access to the server have a
slight advantage over further away players.  This is especially true when
transatlantic links are involved.

How to start Playing

Hopefully, by now, you somewhat have a general feeling of how the game works.
The first step is to start reading alt.games.gb.  The FAQ will fill in a lot of
the gaps in this article.  The client and server code is available for
anonymous FTP on scam.berkeley.edu.  The HAP version can be found on
morticia.cnns.unt.edu.

Then you have to find a game.  The best thing to do is to wait for a new game
starting up.  They are usually posted on alt.games.gb.  Sometimes there are
newbie games.  Please, however, do not play unless you are sure that you can
regularly spend the time playing.  If you turn out to be wrong, give your race
over to another player.  Races dropping out in the middle of the game can
unbalance a game pretty badly.

Conclusion

GB is fun, but dangerously addictive.  Also, it demands serious time
commitments from its players.  If you decide to play, just remember it is only
a game.